This is a copy and paste of the Calgary bylaw information from the calgary website. As well as relevant text from the clagary business license bylaw

Changes to short-term rental regulations

collapsed all
April 2025
On December 17, 2024, City Council unanimously approved several policy amendments to the Business Licence Bylaw for short-term rentals (STR) operators and platforms in Calgary. The changes are in effect as of April 1, 2025.
The amendments aim to balance housing affordability, safety, community impact and enforcement while continuing to support property owners and the economic benefits STRs bring to the city.
Approved bylaw amendments
1. Primary and non-primary residence licences: The licence type is now issued based on whether the short-term rental is operated from a primary or non-primary residence and no longer on the number of rooms. This approach allows The City to understand the volume of commercialized short-term rentals.

2. Moratorium on new non-primary residence licences: Although approved by City Council, the moratorium on new non-primary residence rentals will not go into effect in 2025, based on the latest Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation Purpose-Build Rental Vacancy Rate of 4.8%. Moving forward, if the vacancy rate falls below 2.5%, The City will only impose a temporary pause on issuing new non-primary licences. This would not apply to new primary residence applications or existing licences.

3. Revised short-term rental definition: The definition of ‘short-term rental’ now includes up to 180 consecutive days to address regulatory gaps in the emerging medium-term rental market. This allows for improved regulatory oversight of STRs, ensuring that these rentals meet safety standards.

4. Licence short-term rental digital platforms: A new short-term rental company licence category has been added to the Business Licence Bylaw and includes an annual $3,000 licence fee. STR companies, like Airbnb and VRBO, will be required to work collaboratively with The City to enhance enforcement efforts and for more informed policy decisions.

a) Short-Term Rental Company means the business of facilitating or brokering Short-Term Rental reservations via the internet and includes any business that receives payment, compensation or any financial benefit due to or in connection with a person making or completing reservations of a Short-Term Rental. Refer to Business Licence Bylaw 32M98 for more information.

5. Removal of condominium board consent: Business licence applicants must comply with their condominium’s bylaws, and condo boards have internal mechanisms to address compliance with their bylaws. Therefore, consent from the condo board is no longer required by The City.

6. Business licences will not be issued to homes designated as affordable housing: To ensure affordable housing is available for Calgarians and not commercialized, The City now restricts STRs in homes designated for affordable housing.
January 2024
Business licence requirement changes that took effect in January 2024 include:
1. Provide a fire safety plan of the rental unit or portion including:
* All accessible rooms and floors for renters, including bedrooms and sleeping areas (living rooms with a fold out couch).
* Location of smoke alarms and fire extinguishers, and carbon monoxide detectors.
* Fire exit locations.
2. Submit proof of ownership or owner consent, validated through a title search conducted by The City or provided Land Title at application.
3. For condos, written approval from the condo board for Short Term Rental, sealed by the Condo Board.

Applicants must comply with their condominium's bylaws, but this is no longer a requirement of The City as of April 1, 2025.
4. Proof of insurance indicating coverage for home sharing or Short-Term Rentals:
* Indicating that the property is insured for home sharing.
* The Short-Term Rental Licence owner (applicant) must be the insurance policy holder.
* If the applicant is a property management company, they must provide their liability insurance.
* Insurance must be issued by a registered insurer in Alberta with a minimum liability of $2 million.
* Browse a list of approved companies.
* Review insurance documents to ensure compliance and satisfies the specified requirements. This information might be outlined separately by your insurance company or within your insurance coverage documentation.
Additionally:
* Licence Inspector review.
* Annual fire inspections done by Calgary Fire Department may be required to ensure compliance with all life safety requirements.
The bylaw changes reflect The City's commitment to creating a fair and sustainable environment for all residents, visitors and businesses. These amendments aim to strike a balance between enabling the economic benefits for short-term rentals and minimize the negative impacts on the community.
June 2023
On June 6, 2023, Calgary City Council approved bylaw changes to the requirements for short-term rental business licences. Changes will come into effect on January 1, 2024 and will apply to new and renewing short-term rental licences.
The changes to the business licence requirements strengthens the accountability of short-term rental hosts and property owners, reduces negative impacts on the community and enhances the safety of guests. The bylaw changes reflect The City’s commitment to creating a fair and sustainable environment for all residents, visitors and businesses.

Short-term rental regulations

Short-term rental hosts need to be aware of the following regulations under the Business Licence Bylaw:
Regulation type
Description
Purpose
Egress
A host cannot rent a room that does not have one or more egress windows. (Multi-storied apartment/condo buildings have existing fire safety standards and do not need egress windows.)


Other regulations: Egress in a multi-storied building, such as an apartment building or apartment style condominium, is regulated under the Fire codes and standards.
* Refer to Building Advisory A19-005 - Egress Window Guidelines for more details.
Ensure the safety of guests in the event of a fire or other incident where a guest would have to evacuate.
Maximum number of guests
A host cannot allow more than two individuals per room.
Other regulations: Fire codes and standards
Ensuring the safety of guests and neighbors by addressing overcrowding issues.
Overlapping bookings
A host cannot allow overlapping bookings of two or more bookings for the dwelling at the same time. This means a host cannot rent out separate rooms to separate guests under separate reservations but can rent out multiple rooms as part of one guest reservation.
Ensure consumer protection of guests and transparency between host and guest while reducing community impacts.
Advertising
A host must include the business licence number in any advertising for the short-term rental.
Discouraged unlicensed hosts and advise guests that properties require a business licence in Calgary.
Emergency contact
A host must post the name, phone number and email address (in a conspicuous location) of an emergency contact person who can be reached 24 hours a day. An emergency contact template is available here
Ensure guests and enforcement authorities can address issues if they arise.
Guest record
A host must keep a record in English and in an electronic form that is satisfactory to the Chief Licence Inspector. Hosts must keep permanent records for each transaction and provide it to the Inspector upon demand. The record must include:
* full name and email address of a paid guest
* duration of their stay
* A guest record template is available here
Ensure transparency of hosts for guests and the Chief Licence Inspector.
Fines for non-compliance

The City’s approach is to achieve voluntary compliance for bylaws whenever possible. This means we will work with hosts when possible to ensure they are complying with the bylaw. Failing to abide by the regulations can result in a $1,000 fine for each of the following offenses upon conviction:
Offense
Section of the bylaw
Offer a room without a window
58.1(4)(a)
Permit guests to sleep in a room without a window
58.1(4)(b)
Allow more than 2 adults per room
58.1(5)
Overlapping bookings
58.1(6)
Fail to include licence number on advertisement
58.1(7)
Fail to post emergency contact information
58.1(8)
Fail to keep record
58.1(9)
Fail to provide records on demand
58.1(10)


Calgary business license bylaw
SHORT TERM RENTAL 58.1 (1) Short Term Rental means the business of providing temporary accommodation for compensation, in a dwelling unit or portion of a dwelling unit, for periods of up to 180 consecutive days, by advertising or otherwise listing with a Short Term Rental Company. (53M2024, 2025 April 01) (2) Despite subsection (1), Short Term Rental does not include the provision of temporary accommodation for compensation in a dwelling unit located in a building for which a development permit for a Bed and Breakfast has been issued pursuant to the Land Use Bylaw 1P2007. Primary and Non-Primary Residence (3) There shall be two classes of Short Term Rental: (a) Primary Residence Short Term Rental; and (b) Non-Primary Residence Short Term Rental. (53M2024, 2025 April 01) (3.1) For the purposes of this section and section 58.2: (a) “Primary Residence” means the usual dwelling unit, including any suite thereof, where an individual lives, makes their home and conducts their daily affairs; and (b) “Non-Primary Residence” means any dwelling unit that is not a Primary Residence. (53M2024, 2025 April 01) Licence Issuance Restrictions (3.2) No Non-Primary Residence Short Term Rental licence shall be issued if the Purpose-Built Rental Market vacancy rate in Calgary, as shown in the annual Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation Rental Market Report, is less than 2.5%. (53M2024, 2025 April 01) (3.3) Despite subsection (3.2), a Non-Primary Residence Short Term Rental licence for a dwelling unit may be issued if the applicant has previously held a Short Term Rental licence issued for that dwelling unit pursuant to this Bylaw. (53M2024, 2025 April 01) (3.4) No Short Term Rental licence shall be issued for a dwelling unit owned or administered by a charitable organization and used for the purposes of non-market housing. (53M2024, 2025 April 01) (3.5) For the purposes of subsection (3.4), “non-market housing” means property that is used to provide rental housing for income groups not served by the private market where: (a) the provider has an income verification process in place to qualify its tenants for housing services; and (b) the rent is no more than 90 per cent of the average market rent in Calgary as set out in the most recent Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation Rental Market Report. (53M2024, 2025 April 01) (4) A Short Term Rental licensee must not: (a) offer to provide temporary accommodation; or (b) permit a guest to sleep; in a room that does not have one or more windows which provide egress to the exterior of the dwelling unit. Application Requirements (4.1) In addition to other requirements for a licence under this bylaw, an applicant for a Short Term Rental licence must provide the following to the Director at the time
or the initial application, or at the time of the renewal of an expiring licence: (a) a Fire Safety Plan for the dwelling unit or the portion of the dwelling unit offered for the compensation that includes: (i) an evacuation plan (ii) a floor plan of the dwelling unit that shows: a. egress from the rooms offered for Short Term Rental; b. all rooms offered for Short Term Rental including all rooms offered as bedrooms or otherwise offered to guests for the purpose of sleeping; c. the location of smoke alarms, carbon monoxide alarms, and fire extinguishers; d. the location of fir exits; and e. notations indicating the dimensions of the floors and rooms; (b) proof of ownership of the dwelling unit offered for temporary accommodation, or proof that the applicant has obtained the property owner’s consent for the dwelling unit or portion of the dwelling unit to be offered to guests for compensation; and (c) if applying for a Primary Residence Short Term Rental licence, evidence to the satisfaction of the Director that the dwelling unit in which the Short Term Rental is located is the applicant’s Primary Residence. (29M2023, 2024 January 01) (53M2024, 2025 April 01) (4.2) The Director may request an applicant revise the floor plan described in subsection 4.1(a) above if, in the Director’s opinion, it is not sufficiently legible or clearly labeled. (29M2023, 2024 January 01) Maximum number of Guests (5) A Short Term Rental licensee must not allow more than two guests, not including minors under the age of 12, per room. (29M2023, 2024 January 01) Overlapping Bookings (6) A Short Term Rental licensee must not allow overlapping bookings, whereby 2 or more unrelated or unassociated persons are accommodated in the dwelling unit at the same time.
Advertising (7) A Short Term Rental licensee who advertises or causes advertising to be placed or distributed respecting the Short Term Rental must include in the advertisement, in a readable manner, the valid business licence number for the Short Term Rental. Emergency Contact and Floor Plan (8) A Short Term Rental licensee must post, in a conspicuous location on the interior of the dwelling unit used for the business: (a) the name, phone number and email address of an emergency contact person who can be reached 24 hours per day during rental periods; and (b) the floor plan provided at the time of the licence application or renewal. (29M2023, 2024 January 01) Guest Record (9) A Short Term Rental licensee must keep a record in the English language in a form satisfactory to the Director, including by electronic means, in which must be permanently recorded at the time of each transaction the following information: (a) the full name of any person who is a paid guest in the Short Term Rental and the email address of such persons; (b) the duration of the person’s tenancy. (72M2021, 2022 January 01) (10) A Short Term Rental licensee must provide on demand to a Licence Inspector the record kept pursuant to subsection (9). (31M2019, 2020 February 01) Nuisance (11) The Director may refuse to issue a Short Term Rental licence, or may revoke or refuse to renew such a licence, where the applicant or licencee has operated the property where the dwelling unit or portion of a dwelling unit is offered for temporary accommodation in a manner that causes or permits a nuisance or is reasonably likely to disturb the peace of any other individual. (29M2023, 2024 January 01) (53M2024, 2025 April 01) (12) For greater certainty, a nuisance for the purposes of subsection (11) above means any action or behaviour that is contrary to the Community Standards Bylaw 5M2004.
