THE CORPORATION
OF THE
TOWN OF NIAGARA-ON-THE-LAKE
BY-LAW NO. 2025-032
A BY-LAW FOR THE LICENCING, REGULATING AND GOVERNING OF SHORT TERM
RENTALS IN THE TOWN OF NIAGARA-ON-THE-LAKE AND TO REPEAL BY-LAW
4634-13 AND ANY AMENDMENTS THERETO:
WHEREAS Subsection 8(1) of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001, c. 25, as amended
(hereafter, "the Act") provides that the powers of a Municipality under any act shall be
interpreted broadly so as to confer broad authority on Municipalities to enable them to
govern their affairs as they consider appropriate, and to enhance their ability to respond to
Municipal issues;
AND WHEREAS Section 9 of the Act provides that a Municipality has the capacity, rights,
powers and privileges of a natural person for the purpose of exercising its authority under
the Act;
AND WHEREAS Section 11 of the Act authorizes a Municipality to pass By-laws
respecting health, safety and well-being of persons, parking on property, structures
including fences and signs;
AND WHEREAS Section 151 of the Act authorizes a Municipality to provide for a system of
licenses with respect to a business including issuance and suspension;
AND WHEREAS Section 425 of the Act authorizes a Municipality to create offences;
AND WHEREAS Section 429 of the Act authorizes a Municipality to establish a system of
fines or offences under a By-law of a Municipality passed under the Act;
AND WHEREAS Section 436 of the Act authorizes a Municipality to pass By-laws
providing that the Municipality may enter onto land at any reasonable time for the purpose
of carrying out an inspection to determine compliance with a By-law direction, order or
license;
AND WHEREAS Sections 102.1 and 434.1 of the Act and O. Reg. 333/07, as amended,
authorize municipalities to establish an administrative monetary penalty system requiring a
person to pay an administrative penalty for a contravention of any designated By-law;
AND WHEREAS Section 444 of the Act provides that a Municipality may make an order to
require a person to discontinue contravening a By-law and to do the work required to
correct a contravention;
AND WHEREAS the Council of the Corporation of the Town of Niagara-on-the-Lake has
engaged in public consultation, including public meetings and direct consultation with
representatives of the business community and Short Term Rental industry;
AND WHEREAS the Council of the Corporation of the Town of Niagara-on-the-Lake
considers it advisable that such licencing, regulating and governing take place in regard to
Bed and Breakfast Establishments, Country Inns, Cottage Rentals, Villas and Vacation
Apartments;
AND WHEREAS the Corporation of the Town of Niagara-on-the-Lake has reviewed its
requirements with regard to such establishments and wishes to repeal By-law 4634-13 and
its amendments;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the Corporation of the Town of Niagara-on-the-Lake
enacts as follows:
INTERPRETATION
1. Unless otherwise specified, words importing the singular include the plural and vice
versa and words importing gender include all genders and the past, present or future
tense or other related form of defined term shall have the same meaning as the
defined term.
DEFINITIONS
2. If any of the following definitions are defined as per the Town’s Zoning By-laws, the
most current version of the definition from the Zoning By-law will apply.
In this By-law:
“ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY BY-LAW” means the Administrative Penalty By-law of
the Town, as amended from time to time, or any successor thereof;
“ADMINISTRATOR” means the Town Clerk, a Municipal Law Enforcement Officer for
the Town and/or staff member of Fire and Emergency Services, whose duties include
the administration and enforcement of this By-law, including but not limited to the
issuance of a license.
“AMENITY AREA” means the area situated within the boundaries of any residential
development site intended for recreational purposes, and may include landscaped
open space, patios, private amenity areas, balconies, communal lounges, swimming
pools, children’s play areas, but does not include any area occupied at grade by a
building’s service areas, parking areas, parking aisles, or driveways.
“APPLICANT” means the person making an application to the Town to obtain a Short
Term Rental License in accordance with this By-law;
“APPLICATION” means the documentation required to be submitted to the Town to
obtain a Short Term Rental License. Applications for Country Inn and Villa licenses
must have approved planning applications (i.e. Site Specific Zoning Amendment,
Official Plan Amendment, Site Plan Agreement) prior to applying for a license for a
Short Term Rental.
“BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT” means a single-detached dwelling with
no more than three (3) guest bedrooms for overnight guest lodging, where only
breakfast may be included, for the temporary accommodation of the traveling or
vacationing public and includes the living accommodation of the residents of the
dwelling. Such establishment shall be licensed by the Town of Niagara-on-the-Lake
and shall not include a restaurant, hotel, motel, boarding or rooming house, nursing
home, or any home licensed, approved or supervised under any general or special
Act. The principal use of the dwelling unit shall be for residential purposes and the bed
and breakfast establishment shall be an ancillary use to the main residential use.
Guest bedrooms shall not be suites.
“BUILDING” means any structure consisting of walls, foundation and a roof, which is
used or intended to be used for the shelter, accommodation or enclosure of persons,
animals, goods or materials and shall exclude a boundary wall or fence and any
vehicle as defined herein.
“COTTAGE RENTAL” means the commercial use of a single detached dwelling unit
with up to three (3) guest bedrooms that may be rented for periods up to 28
consecutive days for use as temporary accommodation and used as an occasional or
seasonal residential dwelling for recreation, rest or relaxation by one (1) household,
but not occupied continuously as a principal residence. When occupied continuously
as a principal residence (i.e. for more than 28 days), a “Cottage Rental” can be used
as a “Single Detached Dwelling”. A “Cottage Rental” use is not a “Villa”.
“COUNCIL” means the Municipal Council of the Corporation of the Town of Niagaraon-
the-Lake.
“COUNTRY INN” means a residential use which is in the principal residence of the
owner/operator and host, having more than three (3) rented rooms and providing
lodging and only breakfast to overnight guests. Country Inns located in the Agricultural
Zone District are restricted to a maximum of six (6) rented rooms. (A Country Inn shall
only be permitted by way of a site-specific zoning By-law amendment and shall be
subject to the same licencing requirements as Bed and Breakfast Establishments.).
“DWELLING” means a building or part thereof used or intended to be used as a
residential unit.
“DWELLING, SINGLE DETACHED” means a single detached building which is
freestanding, separate, and has independent exterior walls and contains one (1)
dwelling constructed for year round habitation by one (1) or more persons.
“FEE” means as set out in the Town of Niagara-on-the-Lake Annual User Fees and
Rates Schedule, which is not prorated
“GOOD NEIGHBOUR AGREEMENT” means a document which acknowledges the
commitment between the operator and the Town that the operator will make every
effort to work with the Town and its departments to resolve all concerns and conflicts.
It outlines the owner’s responsibility to address the conduct of their guests.
“GUEST” means a person who is not a fulltime resident of a licensed Short Term
Rental and who is receiving short term accommodation in exchange for remuneration.
“GUEST BEDROOM” means a room used or maintained for the accommodation of
the public and which contains no provisions for cooking.
“HEARING OFFICER” means a person(s) appointed by Council, pursuant to this Bylaw,
whose duty is to hear and decide upon appeals submitted in accordance with this
By-law.
“INCOMPLETE APPLICATION” means an application submitted by an applicant
which does not include all the information or documentation required by this By-law,
and includes a property that does not conform to all applicable Town By-laws
“LICENSEE” means the person who holds a current license to operate a Short Term
Rental.
“MUNICIPAL LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER” means a person appointed by the
Council of the Town to enforce this and other By-laws.
“NEW APPLICATION” means an application submitted by an applicant for a property
address for which they do not hold a current license to operate a Short Term Rental.
“OPERATE or OPERATING” means the offering or providing of accommodation for
hire, the accepting of reservations or the allocation of rooms. Operate has a
corresponding meaning.
“OWNER” means any person who is a registered owner, has a legal or equitable
interest, has a legal right to obtain possession, or who has control or management of
any property, land, building or structure.
“PERSON” means an individual, association, firm, partnership, corporation, trust,
incorporated company, organization, trustee or agent and their heirs, executors or
other legal representatives of a person to whom the same can apply according to law.
“PLATFORM” means any software or application or telecommunications platform to
accept, facilitate, broker requests for, advertise, or offer Short Term Rentals.
“PROPERTY” means any lot, block or other area in which land is held or into which it
is subdivided, including the buildings and structures thereon.
“PROPERTY MANAGER” means an agent or representative of an Owner who is
responsible for managing or addressing issues in relation to the Owners Short Term
Rental.
“RENTERS CODE OF CONDUCT” means a document that sets out the roles and
responsibilities of the renter, including:
e behavioural expectations as they relate to non-disturbance;
e providing a warning related to the making of a disturbance; and,
e identifies all applicable Town By-laws that the renter must comply with including
the provisions of this By-law, including but not limited to noise, property
standards and parking.
“RENEWAL APPLICATION’ means an application submitted for a property for which
the applicant holds a current license to operate a Short Term Rental.
“RESIDENTIAL UNIT” means a set of self-contained habitable rooms located in a
building or structure that is used or intended for use as a residential premises which
contains kitchen and bathroom facilities that are intended for the exclusive use of the
unit and has a private means of egress to the outside of the building or structure, or
from a common hallway or stairway inside the building or structure in which it is
located.
“ROOM” means a singular space within a building comprised of a floor, a ceiling and
walls that is capable of being occupied and used by a person(s) and may include such
features as closets, cupboards and private sanitary facilities (an ensuite) a sitting area
and only one sleeping area. A sleeping area is an area within a room that contains a
bed(s) and is not separated by walls containing doors.
“SHORT TERM RENTAL(S)” means the use of a building for overnight guest lodging
for a period of not more than 28 days and includes Bed and Breakfast Establishments,
Cottage Rentals, Villas, Country Inns and Vacation Apartments.
“SUITE OR SUITE OF ROOMS” means rooms that are common to each other
(adjacent and interconnected) and served with one or more entrances and capable of
being occupied and used by person(s). These rooms may include such features as
closets, cupboards and private sanitary facilities (an ensuite), sitting areas and
sleeping areas.
“TOWN” means the Corporation of the Town of Niagara-on-the-Lake.
“TOWN CLERK” means the Town Clerk or their designate as appointed by the
Council of the Town.
“VACATION APARTMENT” means an “Apartment Dwelling” or a “Residential Unit”
above a business on a commercially zoned property that is rented for periods up to 28
consecutive days for use as temporary accommodation and used as an occasional or
seasonal residential dwelling for recreation, rest or relaxation by one household, but
not occupied continuously as a principal residence. When occupied continuously as a
principal residence (i.e. for more than 28 days) a “Vacation Apartment” can be used
as an “Apartment Dwelling” or as a “Residential Unit”. A “Vacation Apartment” is not a
“Villa” or a “Cottage Rental”.
“VILLA” means the commercial use of a single detached dwelling unit with four (4) or
more bedrooms, that may be rented for periods up to 28 consecutive days for use as
temporary accommodation and used as an occasional or seasonal residential dwelling
for recreation, rest or relaxation, but not occupied continuously as a_ principal
residence. When occupied continuously as a principal residence (i.e. for more than 28
days), a “Villa” can be used as a “Single Detached Dwelling’. A “Villa” is not a
“Cottage Rental”. Villas located in the Agricultural Zone District are restricted to a
maximum of six (6) rented rooms.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
4. The Administrator(s) shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of
this By-law.
A Municipal Law Enforcement Officer or Fire Services is authorized, upon
presentation of proper identification, to enter onto land at any reasonable time to
inspect any building, structure or property for the purposes of:
(a) Conducting a pre-application inspection, as required by this By-law; and/or
(b) Carrying out an inspection to determine whether this By-law or a Work Order
issued is being complied with.
GENERAL PROVISIONS:
5.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
No person shall use or operate any Short Term Rental unless they hold a current
license issued pursuant to this By-law.
No person shall advertise a Short Term Rental without a license.
The property address listed on the valid license shall only refer to the address of the
principle dwelling on the property.
Only one (1) Short Term Rental shall be permitted within a Single Detached Dwelling
on a residential property if it is the primary residence. An accessory dwelling unit is
not eligible for a Short Term Rental license. Where there is an accessory dwelling
unit inside the primary residence, the single detached dwelling portion cannot be
licensed as a cottage rental.
Multiple Vacation Apartments may be permitted on one (1) commercial property.
No person shall advertise a Short Term Rental without including the valid license
number issued by the Town of Niagara-on-the-Lake for the property.
Only buildings that have been granted occupancy as a single detached dwelling (from
the date of occupancy and with or without a second dwelling unit) for a minimum of
eight (8) years shall be eligible to apply for a Cottage, Country Inn or Villa license. Bed
and Breakfast will only be permitted in buildings that have been granted occupancy as
a single detached dwelling for a minimum of four (4) years. For greater clarity, this
requirement does not apply to Vacation Apartments.
Any additions or extensions to a dwelling that expand the number of rooms will not
allow the Licensee to apply to increase the number of guest rooms available for rent
until that portion of the addition or extension has been granted occupancy for a
minimum of four (4) years.
All municipal taxes, water and hydro accounts for the property must be current and
not in arrears, and outstanding or open Building Permits issued must be closed and
final before a license will be issued. ,
Short Term Rentals must be fully serviced with water and sewage services approved
by the Town or Regional Public Health Department.
Short Term Rentals must front onto a Public Road or the Niagara Parkway.
The Owner and/or Licensee, in conjunction with tenants and guests of a Short Term
Rental, shall be held responsible for behavioural contraventions by tenants and
guests with the Town’s Noise and Public Nuisance By-law.
No license issued in accordance with this By-law may be transferred to another
person.
A Bed and Breakfast Establishment or Country Inn may provide and serve breakfast
only. Guests shall not have access to standard cooktops/ovens or similar cooking
appliances.
18. A
Bed and Breakfast Establishment or Country Inn, while in operation, must be
occupied and operated on a full-time basis by the Licensee while paying guests
occupy or have the right to occupy guest bedrooms. In the case of an emergency or
short term vacation, the Licensee may appoint a representative to occupy the site on
a full-time basis up to a maximum of thirty (30) days.
PARKING REQUIREMENTS
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
Parking requirements for Short Term Rentals shall be based on the provisions in the
Zoning By-law applicable at the time of application plus any additional requirements
based on the type of license being applied for.
The total number of required parking spaces available must be shown on the plan
submitted with the application, showing the dimensions and setbacks of all spaces.
The total number of required spaces shall be determined according to the zoning
criteria in place at the time of the initial application for license provided that the
property has been continually used under the authority of a license since the time of
the initial application for license.
If a license has lapsed, then parking spaces shall be determined according to zoning
criteria applicable at the time of a new application.
In addition to parking requirements in the Zoning By-law for guest rooms, the
applicant shall provide at least one (1) parking space for each vehicle registered to the
property.
On-street parking shall not be permitted as an option to obtain compliance with the
parking requirements of this By-law.
LICENSE APPLICATION PROCESS
24.
25.
26.
2f,
Only the following persons may apply for and hold a license to operate a Short Term
Rental:
(a) the Registered Owner or the Lessee of the building, provided that when the
Registered Owner or the Lessee is a Corporation, a Director of the Corporation
shall apply, with the consent of the Owner; or
(b) the Lessee of a commercially zoned property; or
(c) where an agreement of purchase and sale has been executed, the person
identified as the purchaser as outlined in such agreement of purchase and sale
provided it is acceptable to the Administrator.
An application for a license for a Short Term Rental shall be submitted to the
Administrator and shall include a clear and legible site plan (except for Vacation
Apartments, see Section 26) drawn to scale and shall include:
(a) the location of all buildings on the property with setbacks indicated from all
property lines,
(b) the location and dimensions of the parking area and the required parking spaces,
(c) driveway access to the required parking spaces, and
(d) ‘the location, dimensions and size of the outdoor amenity area as per
requirements in the provisions of the Town’s Zoning By-laws.
An application for a Vacation Apartment may use the site plan attached to the
registered site plan agreement on title. In the case where there is no site plan
registered on title, then subsections (a) to (c) applies to Vacation Apartments.
An application for a Country Inn or Villa requires additional planning approval prior to
the submission of an application.
28.
29.
30.
21.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
An application will require proof of separate liability insurance coverage for Short
Term Rentals for a minimum of Two Million Dollars ($2,000,000). As well “The
Corporation of the Town of Niagara-on-the-Lake” shall be shown as an “Additional
Insured”. Proof is also required to be supplied to the Administrator for the additional
years of the license or should the policy be cancelled.
An application for a Bed and Breakfast Establishment and Country Inn shall include a
list of motor vehicles that are used and/or stored on-site by the residents of the
licensed premises along with the license plate numbers of the said vehicles. The
Licensee shall notify the Administrator of any changes within seven (7) days.
The application will identify on it the number of full-time occupants of a Bed and
Breakfast Establishment or Country Inn.
The Applicant shall pay the required fees as set out in the Town of Niagara-on-the-
Lake Annual User Fees and Rates Schedule, which is not prorated.
Upon receipt of a completed application and the payment of the fee, the Administrator
shall do the following:
(a) forward the application to the Community & Development Services Department,
Corporate Services Department and Fire Department;
(b) receive and review the application in conjunction with any regulation governed by
this By-law;
(c) carry out inspections as may be necessary to satisfy that the property is in
compliance with the provisions of this By-law, all other Town By-laws, any
regulations and the approved plans;
(d) issue the required Notice to Comply whenever contraventions are found with the
provisions of this By-law.
No Applicant shall submit false or misleading information in the application for a
license.
Where false or misleading information is submitted as part of the application process,
the application will be considered immediately null and void.
In the event that there is no response, follow up or activity with regard to an
application, by or on behalf of an Applicant, for a period of ninety (90) days or more,
such application shall be considered abandoned by the Town, and a new application
shall be submitted, except where an extension of time has been approved by the
Administrator.
Acceptance of an application and an application fee does not constitute approval of
the application or oblige the Town to issue a license.
PRE-LICENSE INSPECTION
of, It is the responsibility of the applicant to coordinate with the Administrator to arrange
for an inspection of the property, by appropriate Town staff, as a condition of, and
prior to receiving a license to ensure compliance with the following:
(a) the provisions of this By-law;
(b) the Ontario Fire Code;
(c) the Ontario Building Code;
(d) the Town’s Property Standards By-law;
(e) the Town’s Clean Yards By-law;
(f) the Town’s Zoning By-laws;
(g) the Ontario Electrical Safety Code; and
oo;
(h) any other Town By-laws that may affect the status of the application.
Failure to correct any identified issues shall result in the denial of the application.
LICENSE ISSUANCE
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
Upon receipt of satisfactory responses to all of the inquiries by the Administrator
under this By-law and compliance with all other provisions of the By-law the
Administrator shall issue a license, which shall expire at midnight on December 31st
of the fourth year, as noted on the license.
A license shall be issued if the completed application conforms to the provisions of
this By-law and every other By-law of the Town, including but not limited to Property
Standards, Clean Yards, Fences, Swimming Pools, Signs, Noise, Public Nuisance,
the Ontario Building Code and regulations made there under and the Ontario Fire
Code, and if all required fees are paid.
Where a license has been issued pursuant to this By-law, the Administrator shall
retain one (1) copy for the Town’s files.
The Licensee shall be responsible for informing the Administrator in writing of any
changes to the approved information contained within the application or any deviation
to the approved plans within seven (7) days of such change or deviation. Nothing
herein allows a Licensee to rent rooms other than those identified and approved on
the floor plans submitted with the application for a license unless the Town has
approved the same.
In the event that it is determined that a license has been issued whereby false,
mistaken or misleading information was submitted as part of the application, such
license shall be automatically revoked.
LICENSE TIME PERIOD
AA.
45.
46.
47.
An application which has been approved and for which a license has been issued
pursuant to this By-law, such license shall expire upon the earliest of the following
events: (a) midnight on December 31st of the fourth year of the license; or (b) the sale
of the Short Term Rental identified on the license.
A Licensee that intends to renew their current Short Term Rental License shall be
responsible for submission of a renewal application prior to the license expiry date. An
application for a property that is not licensed on the date of submission or is past its
expiry date shall be considered a new application.
In order to maintain legal non-conforming status when a Short Term Rental has been
sold, the new owner has one (1) year from the possession date to apply for a license.
A new application for a license received on or after November 1st in any year but prior
to December 31st in any year shall not be issued until the following year.
LICENSE FEES
48. All applications for a
license filed with the Town shall be accompanied by the annual
fee as set out in the Town’s Annual User Fees and Rates By-law, which is not
prorated.
License application fees, as required by this By-law, are non-refundable.
LICENSE CANCELLATIONS AND REFUNDS
49.
50.
Should an applicant wish to cancel their license during the four (4) year term, they
must advise the Administrator in writing (email, letter, etc.). The requesting Applicant
will be provided with documentation that outlines the details of the cancellation. The
license will be considered active and subject to the conditions of this By-law until the
signed documentation is returned to the Administrator.
The Administrator may issue a full refund for the years remaining of the license if the
Licensee has cancelled their license and advises in writing that they have not
operated in the year they are requesting a refund. Applicants must request a refund
no later than April 1st in the year they are requesting the refund.
POWERS TO REFUSE, REVOKE, SUSPEND OR IMPOSE CONDITIONS
51.
52.
53.
The Administrator assigned such duties may:
(a) refuse to issue a license for any application where the information submitted on
the application is incorrect; or
(b) refuse to issue a license where the subject property does not comply with all
applicable legislation, including the Town’s Zoning By-law; or
(c) refuse to issue a license where all the required fees for the application have not
been paid; or
(d) refuse to issue a license for any license application relating to a Short Term
Rental, where a license has been previously revoked, suspended, made subject
to special condition or a property applying for license has presented a history of
contravention with this or other Town By-laws.
The license to operate a Short Term Rental may be revoked, suspended or made
subject to special conditions, at the discretion of the Administrator for:
(a) any breach of the provisions of this By-law; or
(6b) any breach of the provisions of any other Town By-laws or regulations; or
(c) refusal to comply with any notice of violation within seventy-two (72) hours; or
(d) accumulation of three (3) or more complaints regarding distinct events per
calendar year.
Where a license has been revoked, including when the revocation has been upheld by
the Hearing Officer, no license application shall be considered by the Town for a
minimum of twelve (12) months from the date the license was revoked.
LICENSE APPEAL PROCESS
54.
55.
An Applicant, or Licensee,
(a) whose application has been refused; or
(6) whose license has been revoked or suspended; or
(c) who is not satisfied with the terms or conditions placed on the license,
may apply for a hearing to appeal this decision to the Hearing Officer.
Every person who wishes to appeal a decision made under Section 54 of this By-law
shall submit a Notice of Appeal:
(a) within fourteen (14) days of a refusal or revocation;
(b) with the non-refundable required fee as detailed in the Town’s Annual User Fees;
and
5G.
57.
58.
(c) by registered mail to the Administrator.
The Town shall receive all notices of appeal and hold a hearing with every person
who initiates an appeal of a decision made under Section 54 of this By-law.
An incomplete application is not subject to an appeal.
Non-compliance with a Zoning By-law requirement is not subject to an appeal.
HEARING OFFICER
59.
60.
61.
62.
Council shall appoint, by a resolution, a Hearing Officer(s) for a term to be determined
by Council.
Upon hearing an appeal, the Hearing Officer may:
(a) confirm the decision of the Administrator to refuse a license application; and/or
(b) rescind the decision of the Administrator to refuse a license application and order
that the license be issued; and/or
(c) confirm the decision of the Administrator to revoke or suspend a license; and/or
(d) rescind the decision of the Administrator to revoke or suspend a license; and
order the license be reinstated; and/or
(e) confirm, modify or remove any conditions placed on the license, or add any
conditions they deem appropriate.
The decision of the Hearing Officer shall be provided, in writing, to the Applicant or
Licensee, as soon as is reasonable after such decision is rendered.
The decision of the Hearing Officer is final and binding.
LICENSEE OBLIGATIONS
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
A Licensee of a Short Term Rental shall ensure that the following shall be made
available to guests in either hard copy or electronic format:
(a) a copy of the current license; and
(b) a copy of the current Town’s Noise By-law; and
(c) a copy of the current Town’s Public Nuisance By-law; and
(d) a copy of the approved floor plans identifying the rooms and also showing exit
routes; and
(e) a copy of the Renter’s Code of Conduct.
A Licensee shall ensure that only signs in accordance with the Town’s current Sign
By-law shall be displayed.
A Licensee shall ensure that if the Short Term Rental is not occupied by the Licensee
while managing guests, each Licensee shall provide contact information of the
property manager that will be available to attend to the Short Term Rental at all times
within a period of no greater than forty-five (45) minutes from the time of contact by
way of telephone or e-mail.
Each Licensee shall keep a daily guest registration form.
The guest registration form shall contain each guest's name, the guest's assigned
room(s) if applicable, the guest's home address and home telephone number, the
date and duration of stay, the guest's vehicle make, license plate number, and the
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73,
74.
Province or State in which the vehicle is registered. The guest registration form must
be kept current and be available for inspection.
The Licensee, upon request from a Municipal Law Enforcement Officer, shall present
the guest registration form for inspection.
A Municipal Law Enforcement Officer may require access to the licensed premises at
any reasonable time in order to verify the health and safety of the premises and to
verify compliance with this and all applicable By-laws.
The Licensee shall be responsible for ensuring that guests park in the areas
designated on the approved site plan.
The maximum number of guests within a Short Term Rental shall not exceed a total
number based upon two (2) guests. per bedroom [plus an additional two (2) guests
within the rental] who shall be sleeping within the designated guest bedrooms.
No Short Term Rental shall be used for the hosting of events or any other commercial
activity.
All Licensees are required to allow for an inspection of the operation by the Fire
Services, at a minimum of once every two (2) years.
All Licensees are responsible to pay any applicable user fees for the required
inspection in accordance with the Town Fire Services schedule of user fees and
charges.
NOTICE TO COMPLY
715.
76.
77.
78.
When, in the opinion of the Administrator, a violation of this By-law has occurred or
exists, the Administrator shall issue a Notice to Comply to the Licensee.
The Notice to Comply shall:
(a) specify the violations of this By-law that exist as well as those sections of the Bylaw
which are in violation; and
(6) indicate a final date for compliance for all items as indicated on such Notice.
No person, applicant or licensee shall fail to comply with a Notice to Comply, as
issued pursuant to this By-law.
Service of any Notice to Comply issued pursuant to this section shall be carried out
by:
(a) personal service upon the violator by the Administrator; or
(b) registered mail to the Owner; or
(c) by hand delivering the Notice to Comply to the address of the Licensee of the
Short Term Rental, as listed in the license application and documentation; or
(d) by email to the email address provided by the Licensee.
PENALTIES FOR NON-COMPLIANCE
79.
80.
Every person who contravenes any provision of this By-law, including failing to comply
with a Notice to Comply issued pursuant to section 78, is guilty of an offence and all
contraventions of this By-law are designated as continuing offences pursuant to
section 429 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001, c.25.
Every person who contravenes any provision of this By-law is guilty of an offence for
each day or part of a day that the offence continues and on conviction is liable to a
fine as set out in Schedule “A” of this By-law for each offence, as provided for in the
81.
82.
83.
84.
85.
CON
86.
87.
Provincial Offences Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. P. 33 and the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O.
2001, c.25.
Every Director or Officer of a Corporation who knowingly concurs in the contravention
of this By-law is guilty of an offence for each day or part of a day that the offence
continues and on conviction is liable to a fine as set out in Schedule A of this By-law
for each such offence, as provided for in the Provincial Offences Act, R.S.O. 1990,
c.P.33 and the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001, c.25.
Where a person has been convicted of an offence, pursuant to this By-law, the Court
determining the conviction may, in addition to any other penalty imposed on the
person convicted, issue an order prohibiting the continuation or repetition of the
offence or the doing of any act or thing by the person convicted directed toward the
continuation or repetition of the offence.
Any person shall, upon issuance of a penalty notice for a contravention of this By-law,
in accordance with the Administrative Penalty By-law, be liable to pay an
administrative penalty and any administrative fees, in accordance with the
Administrative Penalty By-law.
All the provisions of this By-law continue to apply in the Provincial Offences Act in
addition to the designated provisions of this By-law.
Neither the granting of a license, the approval of an application, nor an inspection
made by the authority having jurisdiction shall in anyway relieve the Owner / Occupant
of the property from full responsibility for fulfilling the work or required maintenance in
accordance with the provisions of this By-law.
FLICT AND SEVERABILITY
If any portion of this By-law is found to be in conflict with any other provision of any
zoning, building, fire, safety or other By-law of the Town or regulations, the provision
which establishes the higher standard shall prevail.
Should any section, clause or provision of this By-law be declared by a Court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of the By-law
as a whole or any part hereof, other than the part which was declared to be invalid.
TRANSITION CLAUSE
88. Upon the date of passing of this By-law, any license issued pursuant to By-law 4634-
13, as amended, shall remain in force and effect until the expiration date, as indicated
on the subject license.
REPEAL
89. By-law 4634-13 and any amendments thereto, are hereby repealed.
EFFECTIVE DATE
90. This By-law shall come into full force and effect of the final date of passage hereof.
READ A FIRST, SECOND AND THIRD TIME AND PASSED THIS 27TH DAY OF MAY,
2025
OR GARY ZAKEPA TOWN CLERK GRANT BIVOL
SCHEDULE A
TO BY-LAW NO. 2025-032
TOWN OF NIAGARA-ON-THE-LAKE SHORT TITLE: Short Term Rental By-law
ITEM | SHORT FORM WORDING OFFENCE | SET FINE
1 Operating a Short Term Rental without a current license. 5 $1,000
2 Advertising a Short Term Rental without a license. 6 $1,000
3 Advertising a Short Term Rental without a license number 9 $100
displayed.
4 Operating a Bed and Breakfast Establishment or Country Inn | 18 $1,000
while not being occupied on a full-time basis by the Licensee
or appointed representative.
5 Failing to post a current copy of the documents referenced in | 63 $100
Section 63 of this By-law.
6 Failing to respond to a complaint within forty-five (45) 65 $500
minutes.
7 Failing to keep a current guest registration form. 66 $250
(ee)
Exceeding the permitted number of occupants. 71 $500
9 Hosting an event or similar commercial activity on the 72 $1000
property of a Short Term Rental.